I was asked today by several people some
of them sincerely and some of them in
sincerely to discuss the definition of
communism on this channel in the past
I've discussed the definition of
socialism which is in many ways more
interesting to me I think a more new
Austin challenging area of discussion
and especially in how it applies to
politics today
I've also discussed the meaning of being
left wing being right wing left and
right as broad cultural categories as
political concepts that seems so
malleable and have different meanings in
different cultures and different periods
of history but today we're talking about
communism and we're going to approach
this in the way I would approach it if I
were a university professor putting
together a course putting together a set
of readings for the students to do many
people would presume to begin a
discussion of communism at the end by
talking about dictatorships that killed
tens of millions of people dictatorships
like Joseph Stalin Russia and Mao Zedong
in China by discussing the great
disasters that have come to define the
significance of communism in the public
imagination I think it's actually really
important to begin a discussion of the
meaning of communism the definition and
how it changed over time by looking at
the period before Karl Marx I would
assign as the first reading in a course
of this type Thomas More's utopia utopia
by Thomas More it's impossible to
exaggerate how influential this book was
historically and yet on the other hand
it's impossible to exaggerate how
unknown and forgotten it is now today
when people read this book it's very
difficult for them to even at random
what it was that was so inspiring or so
important about it and that is in some
ways a reflection of just how
influential it's been it's become so
influential that its influence has
become pervasive to the point of being
invisible it's also very strange because
Thomas More's utopia is ultimately a
somewhat silly book it's written with a
very strange uniquely British sense of
humor which is a distinctively British
sense of humor does anyone really think
that Thomas Moore is seriously proposing
that in the future man concert have a
utopia where people make toilets out of
solid gold where their chamber pots are
gold so that they come to regard gold as
something worthless no probably not
literally this is again a sort of
strange dry sense of humor but it is
part of the process of him putting
forward its point Thomas More can be
very directly contrasted to Bernard
Mandeville in the fable of the bees
Bernard Mandeville is definitely one of
the most important thinkers and
philosophers in the history of political
economy the development of economics as
a science and even a sense the the
ethics of capitalism but if Bernard
Mandeville is the first bold step off in
one direction with his thesis that
public virtues are private vices then
Thomas More's utopia is a step in the
opposite direction Thomas More gave
people the thrilling idea that what they
ought to accomplish in future is a
society with no money at all with the
abolition of money itself and it's very
significant to note that to some extent
in the original text Thomas More is
joking when the text was for example
translated into Japanese and Chinese any
trace of that dry British sense of humor
was gone
now what was Thomas More joking about in
a sense he was joking about the way in
which ancient Greek and Roman ideas were
being imported to England France Germany
Western Europe in his time in there was
being imported or exported across many
centuries and also across geographical
and cultural barriers there's no doubt
that of course dealing with communism in
a thoroughgoing way could also look for
components of the definition of
communism in ancient Greek writing if I
had to pick just two sources I would
probably pick Aristotle and the comedian
Aristophanes just some short passages
from Aristophanes Aristophanes provides
illustrations of the extent to which in
ancient Athens people were real
interested in entertaining ideas about
creating a whole new society of
radically different principles radically
restructuring the nature of the family
the nature of property of course one of
the simplest forms of radical
redistribution of wealth was simply for
the government to take away all the land
from the rich people and give it to all
the poor people this happened again and
again in ancient Greece and note that
I'm not saying Athens but in the greater
Greek area that's observed and commented
on by people like Aristotle the idea of
the government taking away private
property and redistributing it was a
shall we say a commonplace feature of
revolutions in ancient Greece and
continue to be discussed and reflected
upon at least in ancient Rome the role
of the state the notion of private
property the idea that the state had the
role of master educator in forming and
reforming human nature these ideas are
powerfully found in ancient Greek
sources and indeed they became very
dangerous in 19th and 20th century
communism so we could look for some
elements of that in Aristotle some
evidence in Aristophanes and then I
think ultimately it has to deal with
some of the historical and pseudo
historical sources on Sparta in early
communism it's actually remarkable how
often people observing what was going on
for example in the Soviet Union in the
1920s referred to it as the new Sparta
and made both joking and serious
comparisons to Sparta the extent to
which Sparta and lies told about Sparta
because it's normally not it's not the
real historical facts but the mythology
surrounding Sparta inspired communists
and fascists alike all kinds of radical
and extreme political movements in
history of Europe is unbelievable but
one of the legends about Sparta and this
is really drawing the line from Thomas
Moore to communism in a powerful way one
of the most important legends about
Sparta was the idea that people there
had no money that they had no gold that
it was shameful for them to buy and sell
or property of any kind that it was a
culture utterly set against Commerce and
instead fixated on a very different
notion of true virtue and in some ways
of course the philosophy of Plato is a
response to that and a commentary on
that now anyone who gives careful and
balanced consideration will realize that
this this has about as much relation to
real life as Sesame Street resembles an
actual street you know city but in a
case the historically real Sparta
inspired these legends and these legends
in their turn inspired a range of
utopian thinkers to some extent Thomas
More but much more those who came in the
centuries that followed after Thomas
More's utopia now I'm not gonna say a
lot further here about communists before
Karl Marx it's important to note though
that Karl Marx himself who was put it
this way he was more famous and
influential after he died than when he
was alive Karl Marx himself referred to
other people as communists there's a
very telling quotation in which Karl
Marx or refers to Louis Auguste Blanqui
and the Blanc East's as the real
communists in many ways the life of Karl
Marx is when communism ceases to have
anything meaningful to do with communes
which again this could be a whole
separate long lecture about that many
people ask me I can remember some of my
ex-girlfriends saying why is it the
Communists are so little interested in
communes the use of the term Communists
and communist and the use of these terms
in various French Revolutions plural you
have to remember in French the word
commune doesn't really have the same
meaning as it has in English and France
is really another big forgotten source
of inspiration for this tree of
communism people today of course think
of Russia China even places like Cuba
but France was much much more important
in the past than people now think it was
for how communism as an ideology and
political movement developed and for how
Karl Marx's own thought
Karl Marx and angles were basically
obsessed with the details of the French
Revolution and indeed a sense of just
how committed they were to violence was
that they examined that history and
their conclusion was not the future of
their hypothetical political movement
the the political movement they were
writing down on paper but not actually
leading they committed their movement to
being much more violent than the
disasters of the French Revolution both
french revolutions plural they've
rejected ameliorative and conciliatory
approach to political progress and
change they looked at the violence and
class warfare of the French Revolution
and they looked at the ideas about class
struggle that they found in Aristotle it
really is aerosol that's the single most
important inspiration for Karl Marx and
is looking at the structure of class
interest shaping society they looked at
all that legacy of violence that look at
those examples and they said no in the
future things should be ought to be more
violence still so talking about then the
marxist period of communism answer said
there's the pre Marxist period and
there's the Marxist period we have the
emergency air of several distinctive
elements of communism that will continue
up to this day from the first period
from Thomas More's utopia forward we had
the idea of abolishing money that this
ideal which is an found in ancient
Sparta at least mythologically found in
Thomas More's utopia that would continue
through to the present day it's not coal
Marx's a special fascination but it does
indeed continue through Karl Marx the
idea of abolishing currency itself I
would say is not it doesn't have the
same emphasis in Karl Marx as other
elements of communism but it marks one
of his distinctive one of the
distinctive elements of his approach
that says support from other communists
commune ARDS revolutionary new jovian
thinkers is the emphasis on class
struggle class warfare materialist
dialectics the idea that his
interpretation of history was a
prediction of the future that was
ineluctable and inevitable because of
his analysis of quote unquote the
material conditions of class struggle so
on and so forth with Marx we have
set in stone so to speak a formula for
violence and the idea that social
progress can only come about through
struggle through class struggle through
class war that it's only exclusively
when the working class rises up and
takes away the means of production from
the the more elite classes is the
bourgeois class the aristocrats and so
on that that is absolutely the only way
forward in history and there's no value
whatsoever for example in the
aristocrats becoming more kindly
disposed towards the people or the
bourgeoisie becoming a I don't know
better at caring for the welfare of
factory workers or law and regulations
improving the conditions of failures no
no that in Marxist view is false
consciousness false consciousness is
false in contrast what was fundamentally
the view of class self-interest set down
by Aristotle so in many ways Karl Marx
took Aristotle's philosophy of how
society works and turned it on its head
turned it upside down now those of you
are familiar with kind of mainstream
Marxist dogmatism will know that the
standard phrase said about the origin of
Karl Marx's philosophy was that he took
the philosophy of Hegel and turned it on
its head um I think there's very little
truth and facility to that and I'm in a
position to say because I've actually
read the philosophy of Hegel very few
people laughs it's incredibly boring and
that's very very little relation to you
know in a meaningful sense the
discussion we're having today the the
meeting of Marxism so in moving forward
from the pre Marxist period to the
Marxist period quite a few distinctive
features of communism are added to the
list in Marxist period if you're doing a
full course you know you could really
make a checklist and work through them
and it's worth noting to some extent
Marx commits to any one of these but
only to a limited extent so to give an
example if you move all the way forward
to Mao Zedong and
China in the 1960s by that period of
time it was obvious to everyone who was
a communist that what communism
necessarily entailed was the destruction
of religion in the most literal sense
persecuting Buddhist monks burning down
Buddhist monasteries so on and so forth
and now if you go back and look at Carl
Marxism right at what he says about
religion Co Marx does say that religion
is the opiate of the masses but if you
read that in context the opiate of the
masses the soul for a soulless world
it's not clear at all I mean it's not
clear at all that what Karl Marx had in
mind was what seems so obvious to
everyone being the meaning of communism
by the time Mao Zedong is in power so in
that same way you can look at
assumptions about well for example what
does it mean to abolish the free market
you have free market systems you have an
T free market systems it's very clear
that from Karl Marx's period forward
communism is identified with being anti
free market but what does that really
entail does it mean that they want a
command economy or not now think you can
go through Marx's own work and you can
you can compare what he says in
different contexts most of what he has
to say is negative I mean a very large
part of what he has to say in task
capital is just lamenting how from his
perspective capitalism is awful and
doomed
there are many many many patches of Marx
in which he seems to be saying that
feudalism was better than capitalism
even many passages where he's talking
about the advantages of slavery where he
seems to think slavery is better the
capital's so he kind of is using any
contrast or argument possible to make it
seem as yes capitalism is is so terrible
even by the way in his brief discussions
of slavery in the United States murder
was slavery of black African people in
the United States those are really
really weird but anyway call Marx didn't
know much about most of the stuff you
pass judgment on he didn't know much
about history United States America nor
India nor China he wrote on all these
topics liberally in any case you can
move forward looking at this as B
like being like a velcro ball that's
rolling across a carpet picking up more
and more lint as it goes you already
have a kernel of the idea starting in
ancient Sparta to some extent ancient
Athens coming through Thomas More's
utopia Thomas More adds the crucial
element of wanting to abolish money and
blaming the existence of money itself
Karl Marx is in a new stage where we
have the accumulation of several new
distinctive features of communism and
that really separates communism at that
point from the earlier frankly more
idealistic less violent period of
various schools of Communists and
communist anyway and that more
open-minded period when someone like
Karl Marx himself could look at a
totally different philosophy like louia
Gus funky and say oh they they're
legitimate commerce they're the real
communist after Karl Marx the definition
of communism becomes narrow from the
perspective of communists themselves and
they become intensely interested in
persecuting and murdering one another
internal violence within communism so
that only people who meet their precise
definition of what communism is frankly
are allowed to live that's very similar
to the history of many mainstream
religions both because both Catholicism
and Protestantism have a long history of
that that they have a definition and
anyone doesn't measure up to it is much
more of a threat to the coherence of
that religion than outside and openly
opposed forces so going along the carpet
then you get into a discussion of Lenin
and how Marxist Leninist is different
from Marxism obviously you have to deal
with Stalin ISM obviously you have to
deal with Mao Zedong but of course there
were smaller
I mean Yugoslavia has its own whole
history of communist philosophy and
communism in practice which can be very
illuminating you can look at well
obviously you know from my perspective
places like Laos Cambodia Vietnam these
are also interesting mirrors to hold up
to how these different ideologies
developed as they as they went along so
you know what is communism how are you
going to have you
to define it well one of the crucial
clarifications that have had to make
again and again is that communism
promises that the workers will take over
the means of production but what it
delivers in practice is that the state
will take over the means of production
it promises that the farmers will take
back the land from the landlords that
the poor will take back ownership of
land from the aristocrats
but what it delivers is that all land
ownership is taken away and centralized
by the state communism is indeed defined
in historical reality by command economy
and by centralization as opposed to
decentralization to an astounding extent
it's defined in practice by
totalitarianism by the extension of
government control over all else
basically a form of military
dictatorship that to a greater and
greater extent dictates every element of
human life and why is that well it is
probably because as mentioned at a much
earlier stage it was very clear what
Karl Marx was against what he wanted to
abolish he wanted to abolish the free
market he wanted to abolish capital
itself he wanted to abolish banking he
wanted to abolish investments he wants
to abolish these things the word abolish
is very easy to throw around and then in
practice what are you really going to
replace it with one way or another again
and again what we saw was simply the
extension of the military over these
things or of command economy state
organs offices and bureaucracies that
very fundamentally remove very
fundamentally mimicked military
organization and that also like the
military ultimately rely on violence to
force people to comply there's a very
good book called the new class by mill
evangelist so mill evangelist just felt
DJ ILS mill evangelist lived through the
formation of actually existing communism
and you just la va and he points out I
think relatively concisely it's a short
book that while the Communist promised
you know a new type of freedom what they
actually
livered was a return to a type of
feudalism it created a new type of
aristocracy it was simply an aristocracy
defined by your status within the
Communist Party